[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Edfu, Egypt.
This ancient town is located
on the Western side of the Nile
River in upper Egypt,
60 miles South of Luxor.
In the mid-19th century, French
Egyptologist Auguste Marriette
is credited with uncovering the
mysterious ruins here, Temple
Edfu.
Since then, researchers
and the general public
have been fascinated
by this temple complex.
But what lies written on
the walls of this temple
could shed light on a much
older lineage of humanity
on this planet.
According to mainstream
experts, the ruins at Edfu
were built between
237 and 57 BCE.
And archeologists
generally consider
the first dynastic period
of the great Egyptian rulers
described on the walls
at Edfu to begin around
5,500 years ago.
But do the ancient
writings, known as Zep Tepi,
inscribed on this temple
clue to the existence
of a much older pre-diluvian
time in Egyptian history?
Could there have been
a time when gods walked
among the humans on Earth?
If this is true, what knowledge
did they leave behind for us
that we have barely scratched
the surface of understanding?
>> As fascinating as the
monuments in Egypt are to me
today, my first journey
in the 1980s, 1986,
what I learned from the
people, the Egyptians,
themselves proved to
be just as fascinating
as the archeological remnants.
Because when I ask
them what they believe
the origin of the temple sites
were in their own backyard,
what they told me is that
Egypt is much, much older
than traditional archeology
has been led to believe
and that the ancient
Egyptians did not even
call themselves Egyptians.
There was a time that
Egypt was known as Kemet.
When I came away from
those early conversations,
I think the phrase that
stuck with me the most when
I asked about who were these
first people, the phrase that
came across so many times were
the words Zep Tepi, Zep Tepi.
And what this literally
translates into,
it means "the first time".
And it strongly
implies that Egypt
has evolved over a
period of cycles,
or phases, of which we are now
seeing only the most recent.
And that the Indigenous
people themselves
acknowledge these early
phases and proudly
trace their ancestry back to
Zep Tepi to the first time.
>> In ancient Egypt,
every temple, in theory,
had what were known as
foundation texts or building
texts.
And what these were is how
the first ever temple in Egypt
was established.
And there was
always a story that
went with it to do
with the beginnings
of Egyptian civilization and
the age of the gods, which
was known as Zep Tepi,
which is generally
interpreted as
meaning, the first time
or the first occasion.
And the most complete form
of this foundation story
is found at Edfu
in Southern Egypt.
We would only know about it for
the work of Eve Reymond, who
wrote an extraordinary
book called "The Mythical
Origin of the Egyptian Temple."
And it's the only
book to date that
breaks down all of
these foundation texts
and shows that
they're actually based
on a real history of Egypt
during what she describes
as pre-dynastic times.
>> The Zep Tepi from the ancient
Egyptian language means "first
time".
And it is generally connected
to the myth of Osiris.
My studies started in
an effort to confirm
the existence of a
lost civilization which
lived on the planet
in the ancient times.
The same civilization,
in my opinion,
that built the pyramids
all around the world,
not only in Egypt.
And the timeline is
36,400 before Christ,
when the monument
of Giza and the sky
were perfectly
aligned, according
to the Thoth hermetic
concept "as above, so below".
>> When we look at the
current region we call Egypt,
what we find, based on the
evidence left behind in ancient
temples and structures, is
that there have been multiple
civilizations that have risen
and fallen throughout that
region.
And the area that is
the most interest to us
is looking at where it began.
And where it began
and when it began
is based on a time
period known as Zep Tepi.
>> Zep Tepi is an amazing time
where it was said that the gods
came down from heaven and
turned mud into a kingdom.
Now what's interesting
is Thoth claimed,
in the Emerald tablets, to
have built the Great Pyramid.
He said, I patterned this
pyramid by Earth's force
so that it would remain
through the ages.
And he also is the
builder of Giza,
or the master architect
of Giza itself.
>> Zep Tepi was
considered the golden age.
It was the age of the gods.
It was the time where
everything worked really well.
People were virtuous, they
were really in connection
with source and higher
powers and spirits.
But it's also during
this period where
we find some of the
very early construction
around on the planet.
And so in Egypt, we
find the pyramids
where, even today, we can't
figure out how they did it.
And one of the things
that's interesting
is as you survey
around the world,
there are pyramids
all over the place.
But when you look at
these other pyramids,
they're all step
pyramids, they're all
made out of smaller
stones, they're
not nearly as big as the
ones that you find in Egypt.
And so it tells you that
there was superior technology
happening in Egypt.
And around the world,
these other cultures
were trying to imitate that
technology in those areas.
>> Is it possible most
historians have completely
underestimated the timeline?
That more than 36,000
years before Common Era,
there was a sophisticated
culture in the Nile Delta
region we now know as Egypt?
Robert Bauval, the
Egyptian born author,
has been providing intriguing
insights on the Giza Plateau
since the publication
of his first book,
"The Orion Mystery" in 1994.
>> So there is an interesting
correlation that Robert Bauval
found between the placement
of the pyramids on Giza
and the belt stars of Orion.
Now remember Orion is actually
a very important constellation
to the Egyptians, to
the ancient Egyptians,
because he represented Osiris,
which is the God the afterworld
and renewal.
Now one thing that
Robert Bauval noticed
is that if we were to look at
the belt stars of Orion today,
they don't quite match up
exactly where the pyramids are.
So he did some work and he
found out that 10,500 BC,
those stars almost exactly
aligned with the pyramids right
where they needed to be.
And this was the foundation of
his Orion correlation theory.
What's even more fascinating
is he found out not only
did those three
belt stars of Orion
match the location
of those pyramids,
but we're looking at heaven
on Earth, as above, so below.
That the ancient
Egyptians, as they
were designing the Giza Plateau
in the time of Zep Tepi,
they wanted to match
the heavenly bodies
on the earthly
body so that there
was a direct correlation
of the celestial beings
to the earthly beings.
Also, what Bauval noticed
was that in the year 10,500,
that the placement
of the Sphinx on Giza
also matched the
location of Leo.
And he went, that's
very interesting.
Because 10,500 was
also the age of Leo.
And what the age of Leo is,
is on the vernal equinox,
the rising sun comes up in
the constellation of Leo.
And they wanted to denote that
this was a very important time
period.
>> Robert Bauval is one of the
most important researchers ever
because he earned the great
merit in opening a new way
of investigation of
the mysteries of Giza
and of the pyramids.
Because for the first
time in history,
he introduced a
model of analysis
and that gave us the opportunity
to understand and to study
the Giza pyramids from a
different point of view.
Now observing the astronomical
map at 10,500 before Christ,
I noted a key point.
The Orion constellation
is not perfectly aligned
with the pyramids.
If we assume that the Zep Tepi
is an ancient time during which
the gods lived on
Earth, we must also
say that on the Giza
Plateau somewhere,
there is a monument
that refers to the star
Sirius in connection
with the Goddess Isis.
>> The late John Anthony West,
author of "Serpent in the Sky,"
also introduced an
alternative theory on the date
of the construction of the
monuments on the Giza Plateau.
West was also a proponent
of the water erosion
theory around the base
of the Sphinx that
was introduced in the 1950s
by French mystic Schwaller
de Lubicz.
>> So initially, when Robert
Bauval and Graham Hancock were
discussing the
origin of the Sphinx,
they proposed a date that
seems fairly reasonable,
around 10,500 BC.
But then along
comes West, and he's
looking at the conditions
of the Earth at that time.
Things were in upheaval.
There's a lot of
turmoil, there's
some environmental
disasters going on.
If you look at the structures
of the Giza Plateau,
it looks like they had a very
stable and solid civilization,
that there was no upheaval
or turmoil going on.
So he proposed, when he looked
even further back in time,
that maybe the Sphinx was
denoting a previous age of Leo,
way back in the processional
cycle at 36,000 BC.
And then as eons
passed, we come across
many different calamities
hitting the Earth, especially
the Younger Dryas period.
And this is where we come
in to seeing the big water
erosion all over the Sphinx
and across the Giza Plateau,
suggesting that these
structures were already
in place during
the Younger Dryas
and received a massive amount
of erosion during that period.
>> Another piece of data that
has come to light that adds
credence to the fact that the
monuments on the Giza Plateau,
the three pyramids
and the Sphinx,
may date far beyond what has
been believed to be possible
in the past is the erosion marks
on the Great Pyramid itself.
Inside the Great Pyramid
and on the exterior,
there are markings where the
lower third of the pyramid
has been underwater.
It has been underwater.
And the saline
content in the stone,
you can see the salt markings,
as well as the discoloration
from that water.
>> If salt levels are high and
the Nile River is a freshwater
source that flows
from the south,
where did the salt in
the water come from?
We must turn our
attention north,
to the broken ice
wall in the North Pole
flooding the Mediterranean
Sea, engulfing the Nile Delta.
>> Now observing Bauval's
astronomical map,
Sirius is under the horizon
line and it is not visible from
Giza.
But in the alignment of
36,000 before Christ,
Sirius is above the horizon
line and perfectly visible
from Giza.
And the perfect alignment
dates back at 36,400
before Christ, when the pyramids
were aligned with Orion's belt.
I achieved the result focusing
the processional cycle
of Equinox, and
following Bauval's model
of investigation.
But using modern
technical devices,
I discovered some
interesting clues
that led me to the new
starting point, which
is the astronomical
configuration at 36,400
before Christ.
The Orion constellation
is not perfectly
aligned with the
pyramids because
on the celestial meridian,
there is a smaller
star of the belt, the star
Mintaka, and not the greatest
Alnitak as we expected.
The second limit is
that if we assume
that Zep Tepi is a reminder of
an ancient time during which
the gods lived on
Earth, we must also
say that the goddess
Isis had basic role
in the dramatic history
during the Golden Age
>> Southeast of the pyramids
is a lesser known mastaba,
or flat-roofed tomb, that was
attributed to Queen Khentkawes,
who lived in Egypt during
the fourth and fifth dynasty.
But as with most apparent
tombs, the original purpose
for this site appears to
add to the Zep Tepi mystery.
>> The Khentkawes mastaba is a
fascinating monument with very
particular shapes.
The monument's disposition seems
to move towards the Southwest.
Suppose we join with two red
lines the northwest angles
throughout the mastaba
center and the west side.
In that case, we obtain a design
that looks like the Canus Major
constellation, having the
star Sirius as its vortex.
It could be considered an effort
to describe the constellation
and Giza, explaining why
they built the mastaba
with a different
geographical position
than the other monuments.
If we observe the west
side of the ridge,
we see evidence of
water erosion that
is very similar to
the Sphinx erosion.
We can assume that the lower
carved part of the mastaba
is the same age as the Sphinx
because of the same water
erosion present.
>> Another interesting monument
with ties to the night sky
in 36,400 BCE is the
Sphinx temple complex.
>> The Sphinx complex looks like
a kind of microcosm composed
by three buildings.
The Sphinx, the Temple of the
Valley, and the Sphinx temple.
Now the question is why
those monuments were built
and what was their purpose?
I find the answer in
the astronomical map,
observing the configuration
at 36,400 before Christ.
If we noted very
close to Regulus
in the Lion constellation,
there are two planets, Mercury
and Jupiter.
So I spent a long time to
take measures of the temples.
And at the same time, I analyzed
some physical parameters
of the two planets.
The dimensions of the
temples in proportion
are the same of the
two planets calculated
on the basis of a mathematical
constant of pi and phi.
It means that the builders
planned the temples
using the same parameters
of Mercury and Jupiter.
>> To the west of the pyramids
lies an often overlooked
monument called the Tomb
of the Birds, or NC2,
that might also have ties to the
constellations during the time
of Zep Tepi.
>> Along my
investigation at Giza,
I noted that the NC2 tomb,
or Tomb of the Birds,
is positioned in
the west of Giza.
From east to west
and in the west,
the monument correlates to
the Aquarian constellation
is the tomb NC2, exactly
the same distance
from the Kafre pyramids
than the Sphinx.
So it could be an
interesting connection
between the two monuments.
And this entrance is
entirely carved in rock.
At the bottom, many natural and
artificial conduits originated
and they look like pipes going
towards the underground of Giza
towards the pyramids.
Some of them are still
blocked and many others
are still unexplored.
Now according to all
that, I can assume
that the so-called tomb
NC2, or Tomb of the Birds,
is the last wonder of Giza.
The builders,
according to hermetical
concept, "as above,
so below," replicated
the entire celestial
vault. Maybe they
wanted to send a precise message
about their divine knowledge
at the dawn of the Zep Tepi.
And their knowledge was a
perfect knowledge of astronomy
that was included in the old
monuments on the Giza Plateau.
Now let's assume that the
Great Pyramid was used
to produce a kind of energy.
In my model, the subterranean
chamber had a precise function.
It was the starting point from
which the energy process began.
In the south wall of the
subterranean chamber in fact,
there is a small shaft.
At the present, it is blocked.
By my model, it was
connected to a device
flowing water from Tomb of
the Birds into the chamber.
>> Several theories around
the Great Pyramid being
an energetic conductor have
added to the enigmatic nature
of this incredible monument.
But there is a lesser known
theory around the Sphinx
that some researchers
believe has
been seeded through the
ancient Egyptian texts.
>> Many wonder if it's possible
if there were actually two
sphinxes on the Giza
Plateau, not one.
For evidence, they point
often to the book of Amduat,
or The Book of the
Gates, which is
descriptive of the
afterlife journey
of the pharaoh in his journey of
regeneration and resurrection.
The Book of Gates have 12 hours.
At the fifth hour we come
to a place called Rastau.
And when we look
at the imagery that
accompanies the
fifth hour, we see
what corresponds to
the Giza Plateau.
We see a pyramidal structure
and we see two Sphinx,
back to back, sitting on top
of chambers or a repository.
And this got researchers
thinking that perhaps there
is a second Sphinx
on the Giza Plateau.
We don't know of one right
now and many researchers
believe that we would
have found it by now.
Of course, there are unexcavated
mounds on the Giza Plateau
so it's possible that
it's still there.
But another interpretation
could be that the second Sphinx
isn't in the material world.
The Sphinx that
we see represents
our world and the
second Sphinx is
in the afterlife realm,
or the immaterial world,
which they thought of as a
mirror image of this world.
That's a key concept.
Because in the afterlife,
the ancient Egyptians
believed that we'll be doing
many of the same things
that we do in our
earthly material life.
So perhaps to find
the second Sphinx,
we've got to look beyond
the material world
into the immaterial realm.
Another reference
to a second Sphinx
is on what's known
as the Sphinx Stele.
This is a breastplate,
if you will,
in between the
paws of the Sphinx.
It's a granite stele that
tells the remarkable story
of the pharaoh Thutmosis
IV in the 18th dynasty,
who falls asleep on the
Sphinx, goes into a dream.
The Sphinx tells him that
if you will clear away
all the sand that
is covering my body,
I'll make you the pharaoh,
even though you're not
in line to become the pharaoh.
Sure enough, Thutmosis
IV clears away the Sphinx
and becomes the pharaoh, and
installs this incredible Sphinx
Stele that shows, once again,
two sphinxes, back to back,
sitting atop a repository
or stack chambers that
are believed to be underneath
the Sphinx on the Giza Plateau.
>> In ancient Egyptian
mythology, usually,
there are two lions or sphinxes
shown and these are known
as the Ruti lions.
And they guard the
entrance and exit
into what's known as
the Duat, or underworld.
And this was the
underground passage
that the sun was
thought to travel
at night from, obviously,
sunset in the west
to sunrise in the east.
And this was visualized
as an actual cave system.
And there were representations
of this cave system
in different parts of Egypt
>> Well, the idea that
there's one Sphinx,
it's always seemed a little bit
odd to me because things tend
to come in twos.
They tend to be two pillars to
the establishment of society
civilization and knowledge
in every culture.
And to have just once Sphinx
is anomalous in itself.
So there is a suggestion that
there is a parallel mountain
in the Giza Plateau,
which is now
the highly eroded version of
its counterpart that we now see.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
In the Egyptian
funeral writings,
a double lion called Aker
appears quite regularly.
And very often, this
Aker is precisely not
very far from the
body of Osiris,
who is often represented lying
in a sarcophagus ready to be
reborn.
Consequently, many people
think that this famous Aker
demonstrates that
there might have
been two sphinxes in
Egypt, the Sphinx we know
and then another one.
The notion of a double Sphinx is
found in the Egyptian writings.
>> Traveling south from
Cairo, down the Nile River,
sits the ancient temple Luxor.
In 1820, a powerful
discovery was
made by Italian traveler
Bernardino Drovetti that
provides a glimpse into
the unfathomable life
spans of the early
kings in this region.
This controversial ancient relic
is known as the Egyptian Kings
List.
>> They refer to it now
as the Turin papyrus
because it's in the Egyptian
museum in Turin, Italy.
It lists all of the
kings of Egypt going back
into mythological
times, including
some impossibly long reigns
for these kings, thousands
of years.
This perfectly corresponds
with the idea that there
was a time before
time as we know it,
or Zep Tepi, when
the gods ruled.
And so what we're seeing here
is evidence in the 18th dynasty,
at the time of Ramesses II,
the time in which the king's
list is believed to
have been written,
that they knew about
this Egyptian pre-history
or this time of human
pre-history, Zep Tepi.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
So there are several
lists of kings in Egypt,
notably at Abydos, at
Karnak, on the Turin papyrus.
And it is interesting to
see that the gods rule
for about 23,000
years and the Shemsus
rule for about 13,400 years.
So these dates evidently create
problems for the scientists,
for the Egyptologists.
It's impossible.
It would mean that, effectively,
these gods existed, that they
lived for a very long time.
For a long time, these
lists were put aside.
But for most Egyptologists,
these dates mean nothing.
They're imaginary for them.
But we must calculate
a starting point
for each Egyptian dynasty.
Therefore, we must
take them into account.
>> The timeline idea from which
Zep Tepi originated, I believe,
is very intriguing because it
could confirm that it refers
to an historical time
and not to a myth,
as the mainstream
archeologically claim.
>> When we look at the
dating of 36,000 BC,
that matches the Egyptian
kings list, the papyrus list.
All of these
documents that suggest
that the Sphinx was
built 26,000 years prior
to the original suggestion.
Now if that were
to be the case, we
would have lost a
lot of the artifacts,
we would have lost a
lot of the structures.
And that is actually also
indication that maybe,
just maybe, West was
absolutely correct.
That the original
time of the Sphinx,
and the original
time of Zep Tepi,
was not 10,500 but
closer to 36,000 BC.
>> So when we begin to look
at all of this information
together, what's happening is
we're opening the door to a new
story.
And we have to ask
ourselves, are we
willing to follow the
evidence to the story
that the evidence
leads to, or are we
going to put that
evidence into a box
and try to force it to fit
into a pre-existing theory?
>> Could the enigmatic writings
of Zep Tepi at the Temple
of Edfu be explaining an actual
first time of civilization
thousands of years before
mainstream understanding?
With the evidence pointing
towards a pre-diluvian culture
that was located in the Nile
Delta region around 36,000 BCE,
the mystery now moves to who
was this advanced culture
with superior architecture
and astronomical knowledge
and how did they
get their guidance?
Who were these gods,
and were earlier humans
walking among them?
Temple Edfu holds the
clues to this ancient story
on its walls.
But as with most
pre-diluvian cultures,
the floods have
destroyed the blueprints.
So as in every great
hero's journey,
we must undergo a
transformation as a species
in order to become the
master of the two worlds,
and return to our origins
to rebuild a society that
is connected with the
stars, like they did it
the first time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]